I'm going to teach you guys how to
program for a squat, no matter what
level you are, beginner, intermediate,
advanced. So, I know a lot of people
might look at my training and say,
"You're at a different level to where I
am. So, maybe the stuff that you're
teaching doesn't apply, and I'm going to
teach you how it does." And if my direct
training at this part of my journey
doesn't apply to you, I'm going to teach
you how I modify all through the year so
that you can use it no matter what level
you are, beginner, intermediate,
advanced. I injured my quad. And when I
injure my quad, I have to start from
scratch again. So, I have to start from
beginner level. So, I used all of the
principles that a beginner would to
build back up. Today, I'm going to be
squatting 260 kg and that's 7 and 1/2
weeks after I tore my quadricep. The way
that I did it was, of course, I didn't
just all of a sudden get weak because I
injured myself. But doesn't matter how
strong I was, I wasn't able to squat
heavy. It hurt me to squat an empty
barbell. So, I wasn't able to do that.
So, I had to start from less than that.
I had to start from a leg press with
zero weight on it and do multiple sets
of high reps. When you're not as strong,
you're able to use a higher frequency.
But then as you get stronger and
stronger, the same techniques apply. The
same squat method that I use. So, that
applies to every single person. I teach
my daughter who's 15 now, but she was 7
years old the first time I was teaching
these exact same techniques. And it's
the same techniques that were taught to
me by Eric Liybridge, who can squat 480
kg. used these to squat 400 kg and to
teach multiple lifters to squat over 400
kg like half Bjöson who can squat 460 kg
with the same technique that I'm
teaching you guys. But we all start from
scratch and the rules the stronger you
are the less total volume you should be
performing and the more rest between
sets you should be performing and the
reason is the heavier you lift doesn't
matter that you're getting stronger the
heavier you lift the more taxing it is
on your body and the more time it takes
to recover in between sets. So like how
many minutes do you rest between sets
but also in between heavy sessions. So a
lot of people say things like you should
squat two times a week or three times a
week for optimal gains. And right now I
am squatting two times a week because I
do believe that is the best way of
getting optimal gains. But as I get
stronger and stronger the rules are
going to change and I'm going to teach
you how I do that so it applies to you.
Now what I'm doing is this is Monday for
me. I'm squatting two times a week and
my sessions have been the exact same
session but heavier and heavier two
times per week. And that is I warm up on
stiletto squats and I do one top set of
stiletto squats and then I come back
down for a low bar squat. So I start
again from an empty bar or or this is
what I consider to be an empty bar 70 kg
and I rewarm up to my top set. So the
idea of today is to go 200 kg for five
reps on a stiletto squat and then I
strip it and I warm back up to my top
single which is going to be 260 kg for
one rep today. Hopefully if all goes to
plan. So without further ado, that's
what I'm going to do. Watch me. And I'll
put this in fast forward so it doesn't
get too boring. And then I'm going to
talk about how you guys can structure
your squat programming to become a
strong squatter, which I believe in my
biased opinion that it's the most
important exercise for any strength
athlete to have a big squat. People
debate is it the squat or the deadlift
that's most important. I say the squat.
I say deadlift is absolutely important
and a very very very close second. But
the reason why I say the squat is
because if you just build your squat,
your deadlift will get a lot stronger
without even deadlifting. But vice versa
isn't as true. Of course, if you just
get good at deadlifts, it'll improve
your squat. Having a strong back is
important. But if you to just choose one
to get good at both of them, it would be
the squat. The squat has the better
carryover for all lower body strength
for everything. If you're a strong man
running with the yolk and farmers
carries, strong legs are probably your
best tool as a powerlifter, as a
non-strength athlete. So that means team
sport, martial artist, building your
squat strength
is number one. And that's what this
whole session is going to be about. The
best ways to program. Uh yeah, and we're
going to get straight to it after I do
my top set.
[Applause]
We're back.
Good. No pain. So, you know, the
struggle is to to make sure that I'm
aligned and unbraced.
I don't need to explode this weight,
especially while I'm rehabbing. It's
about making everything smooth and
making sure up here up on my toes,
there's less stability. So, that's a
trade-off with this exercise. A lot of
people say,
"Is it unstable?" Yeah, it is. But
there's a very big difference with how
much weight I'm using for this exercise
compared to my top sets. So the
trade-off in stability means I go
lighter. And actually 200 kg for me,
although it's not perfectly stable, it's
stable enough to get really good
stimulation on the target muscles, which
is my quadriceps.
Now, that was a really great warm up for
low bar squat. So now I'm going to start
again from just one plate. We're going
to go up to a top single. Uh the top
single doesn't mean a one rep max. It
means a top single. And the goal is 260
kg.
Before I torn my quad, I could squat 300
So I consider that was the level of
strength that I'm still kind of at.
So building back to 300 isn't as hard as
getting to 300 kg in the first place. My
strength was already there. So now it's
just retraining the quadricep while it
rehabilitates and heals to be able to
handle 300 kg. And I'm going to give
myself maybe 5 weeks to get back to 300
kg. And I think that's an achievable
goal. And the way that we do that is top
single. Today 260, next week 270, next
week 280.
Week four is 290. Week five,
back to 300 kg.
>> End goal.
>> The end goal is actually more. So, if I
do compete again, I would like to do 320
kg in competition in the 100 kg class.
That's not a record or anything like
that. I think the record's 330. So, it's
not about getting records. It's just
about I like the number 330. 320. Of
course, I like 330 more, but 320 is my
goal because I believe that that's
achievable in the midterm. Like I said,
5 weeks away from 300
and then getting from there to 310, I
still think that won't be that long
because I think that I'm kind of at that
strength. But then getting from 310 to 3
320, that's when I really need to be
smart with my training. What do I mean
by that is not going heavy every single
week. Because the heavier you go, the
more the body needs to recover. So right
now while I'm rehabbing I'm doing so
this is how my programming is. I go two
squat sessions a week and they're not
different sessions. They're the same
which is one top set on stiletto squats
and then one top set on the low bar
squats. And every week I do that two
times a week and I just go heavier on
every session. Now that I'm going to be
getting to my 260 kg. Now I consider
that to be heavy for me. So because I'm
going to be going heavy I can only
afford to do that once per week. And
then the secondary session which I'll
continue to do is going to be a light
session. So the idea is every second
every week I go top singler of 260 then
top single of 270 with some back down
work not a lot of volume and then on the
light session is going to be not just
lightweight but also a low RP. So you
can go lightweight and train really
really hard like a bodybuilding session
and that's high effort and is very
fatiguing and it's going to make it so I
won't recover in time for my 260. So the
idea of the secondary day is maybe RP 7
to 8 on that day and then a higher RP on
the secondary on the heavy day. So it's
not just about heavy and light. It's
about high effort and I don't want to
say low effort, moderate effort. High
effort and not as high. So RP 8 9 10 or
8 9 and a half on the heavy day and RP 7
to 8 on the lighter day. So let's go
back. Uh low bar squat. So after I do
that, come and check out the equipment
that I use. This is a weightlifting bar.
It's just more comfortable for me. The
weightlifting bar is a little bit
softer. It's whippier. I'm going to
change it to a low bar. So, the barbell,
the the knurling or the grip on this is
quite smooth. So, when I go low bar, I
need a little bit more grip on that bar,
which is where the powerlifting bar is a
lot more aggressive nurling. So, this
one is really nice and relaxing. But, I
don't like to go too heavy with this one
because it bends so much. 200 kg, it
doesn't bend so much. But going heavier
than that, it really can interfere with
your squat. So, that's why I'll be
changing the barbell. Now, while I was
doing this, I'm going to give you guys
just a unrackcking tip because it's
something that I play around with every
single time I train. While I'm training,
in the middle of it, I'm always thinking
about every little detail. And that's
something that I came across today and
it's like, wow, what a difference. So,
when I come to unrackck, so check this
out. A lot of the times when I'm
unrackcking, you know, you're here and
I've got, if you have a look at my back,
come come on, have a look at the
position of my back here. So, this is
how a lot of my sets I was unrackcking.
So, I don't know if you can see, but I'm
quite lordotic and arched in my tail.
And that was feeling heavy. And then I
just went bang, stacked my hips right
under my pelvis.
And the difference between this
position, which is pelvis underneath the
barbell, and this position, which is
like I'm hinging to get the the weight
up. This is weak and this is hard. So,
for the unrackck, get the hips directly
underneath that bar. Make sure you're
not arching your tail. Hips under the
bar and squat that weight up. And that's
the strongest way to unrackck for heavy
squats. I don't put thought into it
usually because a lot of people don't
put thought into it. You know, sometimes
I do I go through phases. Right now I'm
thinking about my quadriceps. So there's
so many parts of the squat that I'm just
not even thinking about because I'm
thinking about I hope this doesn't I
hope this holds up and I hope this is
fine. So when I do that, of course, I
just don't think about it. Everything
everything's autonomous by this point.
So when you learn techniques initially,
so much is going on. But then eventually
you do it so many times that you stop
thinking about it. So, I don't think
about that all the time, but today I did
because when I'm warming up, what I want
is for my warm-ups to feel easy. That's
what gives me the confidence through the
entire session is the idea of a warmup.
I'm already warm by the first or second
warm-up set. So, I do the empty bar and
70 kg for a whole bunch of reps. I'm
warm. The next reps aren't about warming
up. It's about feeling the weight and
having the confidence to know what that
feels like. So, if you wanted, if it was
just about warming up, you can just go
for a run around the block. But you
can't go for a run around the block and
then come and put 200 kgs on your back
and think that that's a sufficient
warm-up. It needs to be specific for the
task that you have. So for me, the
warm-ups didn't feel amazing. They don't
feel great. Everything's still tight and
stiff and I'm still familiarizing myself
with the weight. And I started slowing
down my warm-ups. So I was doing 20 kg
jumps. Well, 25 kg jumps. So I went 70,
95, 120. So that's 25 kg jumps. And then
I did 10 kg jumps. So 120 to 140 to 160.
So that was 20 kg jumps. From there it
wasn't feeling amazing. So I decided to
go smaller increments. 160 to 170 to 180
to 190 to 200. It seems like it's a lot.
But all I'm doing is one rep. And I'll
tell you what happened. When I did the
170, it actually felt no less
uncomfortable than the 160. It felt the
same. But then I did 180 and I'm able to
engage a little bit better. And it's
like, okay, cool. It's small jumps and I
know exactly what that feels like. And
as strange as it seems, 180 felt easier
and then 190 felt easier again. By the
time I got to 200 kg, my body's ready
for that weight and everything felt,
especially the first rep of that 200 kg
felt so easy and comfortable. So
warm-ups aren't just about being warm.
So it's not just about, you know, going
for a run around the block. It's it's
about engaging the body, engaging the
nervous system, having the mental
preparation. So there's a lot of
research around warm-ups where people
are now saying that people are wasting
time with their long warm-ups. Uh
because research shows that longer
warm-ups compared to shorter warm-ups
doesn't carry over to less injuries. So
I think a lot of the research talks
about injury prevention with the idea of
warm-ups. But I don't believe and I I
know that no warm-ups talk about the
highest level mental preparation. So
mental preparation at the highest level
is a huge part of everybody's game. And
I can see so many times when I'm working
with any of my elite level athletes, the
warm-up process isn't just about warming
up the body. It's about getting in the
right mindset to be able to perform at a
high level. And that's what I think
needs to be separated with the research.
You know, the science community saying
stop wasting your time with a lot of
warms. It's energy consuming. That's not
energy consuming. I just did single
single single on you know 170 180 190
one rep one rep with 5 minute rest. So
if anything it's time consuming. I
agree. But energy consuming, no. I
believe that gives me more energy. I
believe it teaches my body how to handle
the loads and how to get my my mind uh
prepared for what's what's to come. So
now, so get this. I just did five reps
on 200 kg stiletto squat. Now that is
what I consider to be my warm-up for my
top single now on a low bar squat. And I
believe, and this is based on my last
few sessions, that every time I've
trained it like that, it makes it so
much easier. As soon as I warm up for
the low bar squats, I'll go play it.
I'll take big jumps because it's now
just so easy for me. So, uh, change the
bar. No more talking. Let's get a heavy
single.
Come on.
[Applause]
That was easy, man. That was easy.
Almost done. Nice work, bro. Nice work.
All right. Successful day. And now I'm
going to teach you how I program for
squats for beginners, intermediate, and
advanced so that you can benefit from
everything that I'm going to be teaching
you. Now, the first thing you have to
understand is the highest priority when
it comes to your long-term success is
mastering the technique. And instead of
talking about technique, now I've done a
really good YouTube video. Click on that
link or wherever we put it. Click on
that link and learn all there is to know
about lifting technique. And that's
going to be the highest priority when it
comes to your long-term progress. But
once you understand that then we do need
to talk about how that we can
then once you understand that now we can
talk about how to structure your
training so that you can get the most
out of your long-term squat progression.
Let's do that programming. The first
thing you have to understand is when it
comes to having a good squat there's a
lot of things that we need to master.
Movement work capacity having big
muscles because the larger the muscles
the bigger the strength potential. And
then we need to factor in strength is a
skill. If we want to try and train all
those things at once, it's pretty hard
to spread ourselves so thinly over all
of those physical qualities. And this is
the idea of periodization, separating
our training into blocks at different
time of our training program. So what
I'm going to talk to you about now is
three basic training blocks that you can
factor in and spend roughly four to six
weeks on each of those blocks. Those
three blocks are building muscle, so
hypertrophy, building strength, and then
peaking for strength. They all sound
like they're kind of all the same thing,
but I'm going to talk about the slight
differences. Now, firstly, when it comes
to hypertrophy or building muscle, I
want you to understand there's a
difference between hypertrophy for a
strength athlete and hypertrophy for a
bodybuilder. So, building muscles is
very important for building strength.
However, don't just think that a
hypertrophy phase for a powerlifter
looks the same as a typical bodybuilding
program. With strength, we need to
factor in specificity. With
bodybuilding, the exercises don't really
matter so much. So, a bodybuilder could
do leg extensions, leg presses, hack
squats, and not even a single barbell
squat. And if you try to do that as a
powerlifter or a strength athlete that
cares about their squats, you're going
to drain that squat pattern. And there's
a lot of skill component to do with that
squats. So, that's what you have to
understand. So, the hypertrophy phase
for the squats is going to look very
different to a hypertrophy phase for
legs for a bodybuilder. I want to talk
about some of the rules that I have with
the hypertrophy phase. So, let's just
call that the first phase, four to six
weeks. When it comes to hypertrophy
research, a lot of the researchers talk
about the total amount of volume that
you need to be spending on all of your
muscles. And a sweet spot that all of
the researchers mutually agree on is 10
to 20 sets per muscle group per week.
So, I look at 10 to 20 sets and I think
there's a very big difference between
the two of those. Where would we start?
I'm kind of team lower volume especially
because I like to consider the
complexity of the movement in the
strength world is a lot more fatiguing.
So squats are a lot more fatiguing than
a lot of the bodybuilding exercises. So
for bodybuilders they might favor more
volume. But either way, it's not that I
don't favor volume. I think at the start
of your long-term hypertrophy plan, you
can think of 10 sets. And if you want to
start adding more volume, then that's
totally fine. I would rather you start
low and add volume than start high and
start realizing that's too much. I need
to start taking away. So thinking about
10 sets per muscle group per week. So
we're talking about the squat pattern.
The way that I would do that two day
split. So my favorite way to build
squats is two days per week. A lot of
the researchers agree with multiple
sessions per week for training frequency
as being superior to one session per
week because fatigue gets in the way. So
if you're to do 10 sets all in one day,
let's just consider the energy levels
for the first five sets, that would take
up a lot of energy. and then performing
the last five sets on the same day is
going to be pretty damn fatiguing and
you're going to be performing those last
five sets out of the 10 in a fatigued
state and you're not going to be able to
lift as heavy and perform as well as
opposed to five sets and then you're
fatigued and then do that on a second
day and do another the accessory
exercises in a fresh state. You're going
to be performing a lot higher. So the
way I would do a hypertrophy phase for a
squatter would be day one the squat
pattern that has the highest relevance
to me achieving my goal. So, as a
powerlifter, I like a low bar squat. So,
day one, I would consider three to five
sets on a squat. And that's my entire
day for squats. And I would do other
accessories after that. So, maybe leg
extensions, leg curls, something light.
And then the secondary day, I would
consider exercises like machines because
they do actually. That's why
bodybuilders do machines is because they
have a lot better carryover to your
long-term muscle building. So I would
make sure on day one I focus on the
heavy squats and day two I focus on
muscle building. Now those exercises
have slightly different rules. So when
it comes to building muscle, one of the
most important things is taking those
movements close to fail. But we need to
factor in the complexity of squats. I
don't recommend you take those exercises
to fail because there's a lot of risk of
technical breakdown and technique
matters. And I don't want to sit here
and say it's going to risk injury,
especially if you're not strong enough
to be lifting weights heavy enough to
injure yourself. But at the same time,
it's never a great recommendation to
take those complex movements to failure.
However, on the secondary day, I do
recommend you take those movements to
failure, especially if you're doing
exercises like leg press or hack squats
or leg extensions. The risk of technical
breakdown is low. You're not going to
break down your technique when you're
locked in a machine. So, on a squat day,
you could be doing something like on
muscle building, I would be doing things
like six to eight reps on squats. So,
you might think six is pretty low rep
range for a squat for a hypertrophy
phase. Maybe it is, but at the same time
it's highly complex. So I actually
consider that's probably a sweet spot
for a hypertrophy phase. But then on the
secondary day, that's when we want to be
doing higher reps on the exercises that
are suitable for high reps. So leg
press, leg extensions, you know, and the
way that that could look is, you know,
three sets of leg press and three sets
of leg extensions. So, if you're doing,
you know, three to five sets of a squat
plus three sets of leg press and three
sets of leg extensions, that's enough
total leg volume for your hypertrophy
phase. And that's a great first program
for the hypertrophy phase. Next, what we
want to do is go into a strength
building phase. Now, the biggest
difference with strength building is
lower reps and higher loads. So, this is
where the first phase of hypertrophy, we
want to be taking those movements close
to fail. Now, in the strength phase, I
want to be being a little bit more
specific with my exercises. So, if I'm
going to break it up into two sessions
per week, I would like to do two squat
sessions per week. And the way that I
would do it is the first session, I
would still factor in the most specific
movement. So, low bar squats on the
first session. And then I would do light
accessories after that, such as leg
extensions and maybe even some other
types of unilateral work. If you like
your lunges or whatever it might be,
that's fine. And then on the second day,
I would do another squat pattern again,
which my favorite squat pattern, as
you've seen me do, is a stiletto squat.
The reason why those two exercises
complement each other so much is the low
bar squat is very hip dominant. And if
that's all you do, you're going to end
up with skinny legs because it's not a
very good quad builder. So, the stiletto
squat is my favorite squat pattern to
position you in a way to really target
quadriceps, which will have a huge
carryover to your low bar squats. So the
way that I would factor that in for
strength building, my favorite rep range
for that is kind of between the three to
six rep range. So the hypertrophy phase
for squats, six to eight reps. The
strength phase for squats, 3 to six reps
is my sweet spot for those. So three to
six reps on a low bar squat plus some
light accessories at the end. And then
on the next day, 3 to six reps on your
favorite quad building squat pattern or
a different squat pattern that suits
you. And then do some light accessories
after that. So that's your strength
phase. Now, here's the thing that you
need to consider. If you are elite level
or advanced lifter and you're squatting
a heavy weight, that's going to be very
hard to recover from. It's going to be
two slightly different sessions. So, if
you're beginner intermediate, you could
probably go heavy on both of those
sessions. If you're advanced, my
recommendation would be to only go heavy
on one session and then on the secondary
session, focus on technique and leave
more repetitions in reserve. And that's
pretty much the way that I train all
year round. But if you're more of a
beginner, train both of those sessions
really hard. The way that I like to do
it, and that's what I'm going to be
doing moving forward, is one heavy
session. And the second session, when I
say light, it's more about the amount of
effort that you use. So, I'm going to be
working my heavy sessions, maybe, you
know, 8 9 up to 10 RP. On my light
sessions, I'm going to be doing, you
know, 6, 7, maybe 8 RP. So, leaving more
repetitions in reserve. That's the
strength phase. Now, the next phase is
peaking. This is the last phase. And
this is where it's important to
understand the difference between
peaking for strength and building
strength. Peaking for strength is about
practicing the skill of heavy singles.
Heavy singles aren't very good for
building strength or building muscle,
which is why on that phase, I'm
typically not doing heavy singles. So
the strength phase, three to six reps.
Peaking phase is teaching the body how
to do a heavy single. So that's kind of
what I'm doing right now is the heavy
single work. The program that I'm
following right now is slightly
different because I'm rehabilitating my
leg. But talking about peaking, the idea
of peaking in strength is to teach the
body the skill of heavy singles as well
as reduce fatigue so that it doesn't
mask your performance. So that's the
whole idea of getting prepared for a
competition. The biggest contributor to
fatigue is volume. So on that last phase
before you really want to test your
heavy single, you don't want to think
about building muscle rep range. So high
reps and taking those movements to fail.
that's going to be too fatiguing to
allow you to truly test your one rep max
strength. So, what I'd factor in here is
more specificity. So, more of the exact
squats that you want to be doing and
less accessory exercises that are going
to be hugely fatiguing. So, this is the
phase where if you want to be testing
your max, don't be doing hypertrophy
movements like leg press and hack squats
and taking those movements to fail. I'd
be doing things like squats with leg
extensions on day one and squats with
hamstring curls on day two. So you're
getting a lot of specificity, you're
getting a lot of practice of the
movement, you're getting a lot of heavy
lifting. That's hugely important, but
you're not doing a huge amount of
volume. So in a nutshell, that's how I
would separate my training is first
phase hypertrophy, six to eight rep
range for squats, and add in your leg
presses and hack squats and your
hypertrophy exercises. The second phase
is strength. This is where we do two
squat days, making sure that both days
are actually squat patterns. And the rep
ranges for strength is three to six rep
range. Something I didn't mention is the
total amount of sets that you should be
doing for strength. It's a slight
difference between hypertrophy. So the
recommendations for hyp 10 to 20 sets.
The recommendation for strength is more
like there's a research paper by Dr. Rya
and colleagues who talks about two two
sessions per week. So the same frequency
and four sets per movement pattern per
week. So that's more like eight total
sets per week. So that's what you need
to consider for the strength building
phase is slightly less total sets. And
then for peaking, the rule is reduce the
volume with the accessory exercise. Make
sure that you're getting a lot of
practice with your heavy singles. And
that's pretty much a 12-week program.
Now, there's one more thing that you
need to factor in, and that is the other
exercises in the week. So, I've just
spoken purely about building your squat
strength. What you have to understand is
if you want to build a deadlift at the
same time, you're loading the same
structures with your deadlifts and your
squats. And that's why I've actually
made an entire video on why I don't do
heavy deadlifts anymore. And I'll leave
the link right here if you want to check
that out. But when I'm building my
squat, which is what I'm doing
currently, I'll squat with a high
frequency. And my deadlifts are going to
be on maintenance. I've spoken about
that before with my lily bridge method
that I've been taught from the Lily
Bridges, which is where I do week one is
heavy squats and light deadlifts, and
then the second week is heavy deadlifts
and light squats. So that's a topic of
another day. right now for squat
specialization. Two times a week is a
sweet spot. Don't push all the other
exercises hard. One of my favorite parts
about squat specialization is I do do
exercises for deadlifts, but I always
keep that on a low intensity so that I'm
maintaining the skill of heavy
deadlifts, but it's not heavy and
therefore it's not interfering with the
energy that's required for squat day. So
heavy deadlifts aren't happening during
my squat specialization. But the beauty
of heavy squats is you're training same
structures. And whenever I'm doing heavy
squats, I'll always come back to my
deadlifts and it'll absolutely maintain
and sometimes even build my deadlifts as
long as I'm keeping my deadlift skill
work at the same time. So what I'm going
to be doing for you guys now, just so
that you know what I do for a living is
I charge people actual money for this.
So this is free, but it doesn't mean
it's no value. I want you to succeed
with your squats. And I promise you,
you'll succeed. You just saw how I
squatted 260 kg pretty comfortably. 7
and 1/2 weeks out from my squat injury.
So, I'm very, very happy with where I'm
at and I'm going to be working towards
getting back over 300 kg at 100 kg body
weight. So, this is me doing a triple
body weight squat. So, these are the
techniques that I use. I learned these
techniques from the best squatters on
the planet, and I apply them to myself
and all of my clients every day, and I
charge actual money for this, except for
now. Enjoy the squat gains. All right,
guys. Uh, that's the end of today's
session. I hope you learned a little bit
about squat programming and how I
structure my program. Anyways, if you
haven't already, click like, subscribe,
and all that stuff.